So we had a look at the essentials of the provider package and actually it's not just the essentials,
it's pretty much all you have to know, provider of or consumer to set up a listener to a provider which
you typically provide with ChangeNotifierProvider somewhere up in the widget tree, either
as we do it here on the root level or as we do it in the products grid right above the widget where
we need. It doesn't matter,
in general you want to set up that provider on as low as a level as possible,
so not necessarily up at the root level of your app but of course if you need it in the entire app provided
here.
So this is the provider and you also learned about how to listen to changes and that you have some optimization
potential with listen: false and maybe also by using a consumer if only parts of your widget tree
depend on it.
A valid question now of course is, why do we not use a stateful widget here?
We're now using the provider to manage whether our product is a favorite or not
but we only need that information here to change the icon which I'm displaying. Now since I change that
icon here in my product item widget,
we could of course also turn this into a stateful widget,
have an isFavorite or showFavorite property in here since this is a single item in our grid and then
simply change that property when we click this button here.
And yes, this would be absolutely the right thing to do if you have some state, some data which only affects
this widget.
Remember that slide, the bottom right area here? Widget local state.
That's state which only affects a single widget
and if you only want to switch the icon on a button in a widget, then of course you would typically manage
that state only in that widget
and therefore you would always use a stateful widget. Don't use provider or a provided class if you
only want to change how something is displayed inside of a widget. Here,
I'm using the provider package not because I want to use providers everywhere but because the data, the
information whether this product is a favorite or not does not only matter to this widget. Right now
in our app it does but that will now change. In the ProductsOverviewScreen, there,
I now also want to add an icon or an option here in the appBar that allows us to switch between favorite
and all products, so that we can actually take that favorite information and filter our grid here based
on it
and that of course means that the information about whether a product is a favorite or not does not
just matter to the product item but to the entire app or at least to a significant part of that app.
So let's now start implementing that. For this here in the appBar,
I want to add actions or for the moment, one action and there, I'll add a widget which we haven't seen
before,
a PopMenuButton. That's a button which will basically open a kind of a drop over menu, a menu which
opens up as an overlay.
Now we give this a button which should be displayed in our appBar and that should be an icon widget
and there
I'll use the more_vert icon which are three dots aligned or positioned above each other vertically.
The PopUpMenuButton then also needs an item builder which builds the entries for this pop up
menu.
There, you get the context which I don't need here, so I'll add an underscore and then you return a list
of widgets, not a single widget but a list of widgets which will be added as entries in this pop up menu
and here you should use PopUpMenuItems.
Now each menu item here has a child and that typically is some text but could also be a row with an icon
next to a text for example
and here I'll say only favorites and besides that child, you also provide a value which is later important
for finding out which choice was or which item was chosen by the user.
So I'll give this a zero and
you can use any identifier you want, could also be a string and I'll then copy this and create another
PopUpMenuItem where I say show all and there, the value could be one.
Now on the PopUpMenuButton, you'll also add onSelected function here, an anonymous function or a named
function, it's up to you, where you will get the selected value.
Now we know that we'll get an integer here, so we can add int here in front of that to make it really clear
to Dart that selected value will be an integer, it will be this value depending on which option the
user chose
and for now, let's simply print the selected value to see whether that works.
Now to see it in action, let's save that
and now you should see three dots here and if you tap them, this pop up opens up and you can choose only
favorites or show all
and therefore here, you see the two print statements for the values we chose.
Now first of all, such a scenario here is always a good place for an enum.
Of course we can use 0 and 1 but to have a really easy way of working with that, we can define an enum,
since we really only need it here, we can define it here in the same file and I'll name it FilterOptions
but the name is totally up to you
and there are two values I want to have - favorites and all. So these are the two values and as you learned,
enums are really just ways of assigning labels to integers, so that behind the scenes, we still have
integers but we as a developer can work with these labels. So therefore down there for this value, I'll
have my FilterOptions.Favorites
and here I'll have my FilterOptions.All,
doesn't change the way this works,
besides one thing, this here will now be of type FilterOptions.
Now the idea of course is to filter the items we're displaying based on the filter we chose here and
the most efficient way of doing this is to simply change the product we have here in our products class
because we're consuming these products in the products_grid in the end.
We're setting up a listener to products here,
so if the products change, this will rebuild and it should of course rebuild when the products change
because we will change the products when the user selects to filter them
and that should affect our grid.
So in the ProductsOverview here, we want to find out which option was chosen,
so if selected value here is equal to FilterOptions.Favorites let's say and in that case, we want to
do something that reduces the amount of items we're showing and else, we're showing all items.
So now in the products.dart file in our provider class, I want to change this items list based on
whether we set a filter or not.
Now one way of managing this is to add a new property in this products class here,
showFavoritesOnly which initially is false
and then here where we get all the items, we take this into account to determine which items to return.
So here we could now check if showFavoritesOnly
and if that is true, then I want to return my items where,
for my item which I'm looking at, isFavorite is true and then we convert this to a list.
It's a new list automatically so we don't need to do that manually copying where down there.
If we don't make it into there, we return all items.
Now this is one approach we can take
and now if you go to the product overview, here all we have to do is we have two access our products provider,
so we get our products data or products container, whatever you want to name it, with provider for which
you have to import the provider package of.
Now I'm interested in products,
so we need to import that class as well from the providers folder and there from products.dart and forward
the context
and that should be done in the build method of course.
And now with products container down there, we can say if we're in here, then I want to call some method
which switches showFavoritesOnly, which actually should be private, so let's add an underscore
but then let's add a new method which you could name showFavoritesOnly and then there, we could set
showFavoritesOnly to true and then we have show all
and there we set showFavoritesOnly to false because we want to show all and back in the products
overview screen,
first of all I want to set up listen: false here because I'm not really interested in the data or whether
it changes,
I only need to get access to that container so that I can call these two new methods we added because
then here if we are filtering for favorites, I can call showFavoritesOnly and here I can call show
all, like this. If we do that and we do a full restart, I can now actually filter for only the favorites
or for all but it doesn't make a difference.
Reason for that is that in the products class, of course we also have to call notifyListeners to rebuild
the parts that are interested in our products data here.
So I do it both for showFavoritesOnly and show all and with notifyListeners
added there,
now if I select only favorites, I see nothing, if I select all, we see all. Looks good but has a flaw.
We could implement it like this and I did it like this to also now show you what the problem would
be. If we had another part of this app which we don't have yet but if we had another screen which also
shows our products, then when we choose a filter here on the ProductsOverviewScreen and we then go
to that other screen, our filter would still be applied there because our getter only returns data based
on what we set here as a filter and that's what we control from that other screen.
Now if you want to have an application-wide filter, this is your approach but often, you only want to
filter on this screen and if you then go to some other screen, you don't want to apply that same filter.
Let's say you have a screen where you manage your products and another screen where you view all products.
If you filter on the all products screen, you probably don't want a filter on your
these are all my products screen as well.
So therefore managing something like this filtering here in our provided class can often be a problem
because it's really an information that belongs to a single widget and not into the global app-wide state.
So with that, we're back to this slide, we're more on the right side here
with that filtering than on the left side. This actually is not the approach I want to use,
I always want to return all my items here and I don't really want to have these methods here which control
what is displayed or not,
I don't want to manage what is displayed in my provided class here but inside of my widgets. And therefore
here in the ProductsOverviewScreen, I don't really want to use my provided products data and switch
my display state or my FilterOptions there,
instead the better option here indeed would be to turn this into a stateful widget,
the ProductsOverviewScreen is now a stateful widget and there in the state object,
we can now manage this showOnlyFavorites data which is a boolean, initially set to false and I want
to switch that when we actually select the value in the pop up menu.
So if we did go for favorites, then I want to set showOnlyFavorites to true and otherwise, I want to
set it to false.
Now what do we do with that information here?
Well we can now pass that down to the products grid because that actually is the widget which displays
our products.
So there, we can forward to showOnlyFavorites
and now in the products_grid, we only need to expect this.
So here, I have a final boolean, showFavs or whatever you want to name it
and of course we now have to add our constructor to accept this showFavs argument and store it in
this property
and now here we can use showFavs. We're fetching the items
but now I want to show only the favorites. And now to not have all the logic of filtering in here,
we can still go to the products class and simply add another getter in there. A getter which still returns
a list of products, of single product items which I'll name favorite items because here, I will return
my filtering logic where I access all items, then use where and for every prod item, I return true if
is favorite is true and then I convert this to a new list.
So now we simply have an alternative
getter, favorite items which does that filtering logic and I reach out to that getter in my products
grid if showFavs is true.
So instead of using items here, I simply can check showFavs and if that is true, then I don't use product
data.items but I simply use
.
productsData.favoriteItems and otherwise, I use items in general.
So now we have a set up where we should still have a grid that changes
but we're managing the import logic in our widgets now.
Now one important fine tuning is of course in the ProductsOverviewScreen, you should wrap this part
where you change showOnlyFavorites
with set state so that the UI is rebuilt
when you change it. So let's move this entire if block here into this.
This is important because otherwise, you could change that data but it would not be reflected on the UI.
And now with that, if we go back, we can choose our filtering logic here
and as you see, if I mark something as a favorite, this also does work
but now we're managing this in our widget because it really only affects this widget, the product overview
widget and its children, like the products_grid
here of course, most importantly.